Requirements engineering is an important phase in a system's life cycle. It is important to perform it correctly. The increasing complexity of systems makes requirements engineering activities more difficult. In design of complex system, the system engineering is widely used. Model-driven engineering, in which models are the main artifact during system development, is an emergent approach that tries to address system complexity by the intense use of models. In this context, this paper proposes a new information model based on SysML to properly manage requirements with a special attention to dependability requirements.
Requirements traceability modeling is a key issue in real-time embedded design process. In such systems, requirements are of different nature (software-related, system-related, functional or non functional) and must be traced through a multilevel design flow which integrates multiple tools and heterogeneous models. Validation and Verification (V&V) activities must be performed on models and on the final product to check whether they match the initial requirements. Results of design and V&V activities must be able to impact traceability information. We thus propose DARWIN4REQ, a metamodel for requirement traceability, based on three independent flows (requirement model, solution model and V&V model). The new metamodel establishes a link between these flows and affords full traceability of requirements, including those set for heterogeneous models. This paper presents the DARWIN4REQ metamodel and its use in the context of heterogeneous models for requirements modeling, design and V&V. An automotive application illustrates the proposed approach based on UML-profiles such that SYSML, EAST-ADL2 and MARTE for design and on SIMULINK, SyNDEx and TIMESQUARE for V&V activities.
Requirements engineering (RE) research often ignores or presumes a uniform nature of the context in which the system operates. This assumption is no longer valid in emerging computing paradigms, such as ambient, pervasive and ubiquitous computing, where it is essential to monitor and adapt to an inherently varying context. Besides influencing the software, context may influence stakeholders’ goals and their choices to meet them. In this paper, we propose a goal-oriented RE modeling and reasoning framework for systems operating in varying contexts. We introduce contextual goal models to relate goals and contexts; context analysis to refine contexts and identify ways to verify them; reasoning techniques to derive requirements reflecting the context and users priorities at runtime; and finally, design time reasoning techniques to derive requirements for a system to be developed at minimum cost and valid in all considered contexts. We illustrate and evaluate our approach through a case study about a museum-guide mobile information system.
Composition of requirements models in Software Product Line (SPL) development enables stakeholders to derive the requirements of target software products and, very important, to reason about them. Given the growing complexity of SPL development and the various stakeholders involved, their requirements are often specified from heterogeneous, partial views. However, existing requirements composition languages are very limited to generate specific requirements views for SPL products. They do not provide specialized composition rules for referencing and composing elements in recurring requirements models, such as use cases and activity models. This paper presents a multi-view composition language for SPL requirements, the Variability Modeling Language for Requirements (VML4RE). This language describes how requirements elements expressed in different models should be composed to generate a specific SPL product. The use of VML4RE is illustrated with UML-based requirements models defined for a home automation SPL case study. The language is evaluated with additional case studies from different application domains, such as mobile phones and sales management.
Requirements engineering for complex systems often requires inter-disciplinary collaboration between domain experts who might not have software or systems engineering background. Existing requirements modeling languages unfortunately do not support this scenario well. First, the visual notation of languages like UML or SysML does not follow scientific heuristics and therefore does not provide a homogeneous and more important interdisciplinary comprehensible visualization. Second they provide isolated solutions for specific aspects like feature modeling or hazard modeling and therefore do not provide integrated and interdisciplinary traceability. We propose the Unified Requirements Modeling Language (URML) to overcome these two issues. URML integrates aspects like goal modeling, feature modeling and hazard analysis into one model and aims at a homogeneous and comprehensible visualization. In this paper we propose the meta-model for URML, describe the development of the corresponding visualization as well as initial tool support.
We argue for the creation and use of a very lightweight requirements modeling language as an alternative to textual and pictorial requirements specifications.
Requirement engineering is the most effective phase of software development process. It aims to collect good requirements from stakeholders in the right way. It is important for every organization to develop quality software products that can satisfy user's needs. Requirements engineering for software development process is a complex exercise that considers product demands from a vast number of viewpoints, roles, responsibilities, and objectives. Therefore, it becomes necessary to apply requirement engineering practices in every phase of software development process. In this paper, we propose an effective requirements engineering process model to produce quality requirements for software development. Requirement management and planning phase is executed independently for an effective management of requirements. It is iterative in nature for better requirement engineering and later maintenance. The successful implementation of proposed requirement engineering process can have a good impact on the production of quality software product.
Software systems are becoming larger and more complex. By tackling the modularisation of crosscutting concerns, aspect orientation draws attention to modularity as a means to address the problems of scalability, complexity and evolution in software systems development. Aspect-oriented modelling (AOM) applies aspect-orientation to the construction of models. Most existing AOM approaches are designed without a formal semantics, and use multi-view partial descriptions of behaviour. This paper presents an AOM approach based on the Visual Contract Language (VCL): a visual language for abstract and precise modelling, designed with a formal semantics, and comprising a novel approach to visual behavioural modelling based on design by contract where behavioural descriptions are total. By applying VCL to a large case study of a car-crash crisis management system, the paper demonstrates how modularity of VCL’s constructs, at different levels of granularity, help to tackle complexity. In particular, it shows how VCL’s package construct and its associated composition mechanisms are key in supporting separation of concerns, coarse-grained problem decomposition and aspect-orientation. The case study’s modelling solution has a clear and well-defined modular structure; the backbone of this structure is a collection of packages encapsulating local solutions to concerns.
Context Learning can be regarded as knowledge construction in which prior knowledge and experience serve as basis for the learners to expand their knowledge base. Such a process of knowledge construction has to take place continuously in order to enhance the learners’ competence in a competitive working environment. As the information consumers, the individual users demand personalised information provision which meets their own specific purposes, goals, and expectations. Objectives The current methods in requirements engineering are capable of modelling the common user’s behaviour in the domain of knowledge construction. The users’ requirements can be represented as a case in the defined structure which can be reasoned to enable the requirements analysis. Such analysis needs to be enhanced so that personalised information provision can be tackled and modelled. However, there is a lack of suitable modelling methods to achieve this end. This paper presents a new ontological method for capturing individual user’s requirements and transforming the requirements onto personalised information provision specifications. Hence the right information can be provided to the right user for the right purpose. Method An experiment was conducted based on the qualitative method. A medium size of group of users participated to validate the method and its techniques, i.e. articulates, maps, configures, and learning content. The results were used as the feedback for the improvement. Result The research work has produced an ontology model with a set of techniques which support the functions for profiling user’s requirements, reasoning requirements patterns, generating workflow from norms, and formulating information provision specifications. Conclusion The current requirements engineering approaches provide the methodical capability for developing solutions. Our research outcome, i.e. the ontology model with the techniques, can further enhance the RE approaches for modelling the individual user’s needs and discovering the user’s requirements.
Goal-Oriented Requirements Engineering (GORE) has received increasing attention over the past few years. There are several goal-oriented approaches, each one using different kinds of models. We believe that it would be useful to relate them or even transform them automatically, in order to, for example, smooth the process of migration from one model to another. In this paper we propose the definition and implementation of goal model transformations between i* and KAOS. This approach will contribute to relate the concepts of i* and KAOS models and will help, for example, a development team in making the decision on which approach to follow, according to the nature of the project.
This paper develops a requirement modeling language called SPARDL for modeling and analyzing periodic control systems. The system consists of periodic behaviors together with a mode transition mechanism for different behavioral patterns, which is largely applied in the development of control systems of spacecrafts and automobiles. SPARDL can specify the features such as periodic driven behaviors, procedure invocations, timed guard, and mode transition, etc. Each mode in SPARDL can also contain complex activities such as controlling behaviors and data processing. To understand system behaviors precisely, a structural operational semantics is proposed for SPARDL. To analyze periodic control systems in SPARDL, a requirement prototype generation algorithm is proposed to simulate and test the requirements. Meanwhile, a case study is presented to illustrate our approach to requirement modeling and simulation in the development of control systems.
In the automotive industry requirements are often still composed of natural language text, spreadsheets, drawings, and formal models. Models are often used to describe partial aspects from the whole set of requirements. Hence, flaws and vagueness in requirements are common and hard to discover. Upcoming standards like ISO 26262 request the automotive industry to be more strict and formal on the requirements. Formal notation and unambiguitiy is explicitely stated. In the field of system and acceptance testing requirements are the basis for all activities. Although, requirements are often not close to testing. To overcome this we introduced the Timed Usage Model (TUM) as a formal representation of requirements specification. During the creation of the model the requirements are analyzed and brought into an unambiguous and formal representation. Traceability is achieved, as each path in the model must be based upon a requirement. The formulation of the requirements in form of an unambiguous model clarifies the requirements and helps to detect design errors. During the creation of the model omissions and flaws in the requirements are discovered. The model serves as a communication medium when functionality responsibles are involved to clarify these aspects. Timed Usage Models were created for power train functionality and the energy management. Moreover, the model as a formalized representation of the requirements served as the basis for the whole testing process, including test planning, test case generation, and test campaign analysis.
The User Requirements Notation (URN) is a recent ITU-T standard that supports requirements engineering activities. The Aspect-oriented URN (AoURN) adds aspect-oriented concepts to URN, creating a unified framework that allows for scenario-based, goal-oriented, and aspect-oriented modeling. AoURN is applied to the car crash crisis management system (CCCMS), modeling its functional and non-functional requirements (NFRs). AoURN generally models all use cases, NFRs, and stakeholders as individual concerns and provides general guidelines for concern identification. AoURN handles interactions between concerns, capturing their dependencies and conflicts as well as the resolutions. We present a qualitative comparison of aspect-oriented techniques for scenario-based and goal-oriented requirements engineering. An evaluation carried out based on the metrics adapted from literature and a task-based evaluation suggest that AoURN models are more scalable than URN models and exhibit better modularity, reusability, and maintainability.
Requirements engineering is a core activity in software engineering. However, formal requirements engineering methodologies and documented requirements are often missing in scientific computing projects. We claim that there is a need for methodologies, which capture requirements for scientific computing projects, because traditional requirements engineering methodologies are difficult to apply in this domain. We propose a novel domain specific requirements model to meet this need. We conducted an exploratory experiment to evaluate the usage of this model in scientific computing projects. The results indicate that the proposed model facilitates the communication across the domain boundary, which is between the scientific computing domain and the software engineering domain. It supports requirements elicitation for the projects efficiently.
Central to the development of BPMS technology was the promotion of a new language, Business Process Modelling Notation (BPMN). The primary goal of BPMN is to provide a common language for describing process behaviour, shareable by business and IT, which includes business users, business analysts, and technical developers. What seems to be missing in the way that business users are supposed to use BPMN, is an explicit consideration of the strategic rationale of having certain business processes as well as support for describing business processes in terms familiar to business people. We extended current work on Goal-Oriented Requirements Engineering (GORE) for business process design, i.e., B-SCP framework [1] and the work of Lapouchnian et al. [2], in order to obtain an appropriate GORE for BPMN modelling method. Our first contribution is the introduction of a B-SCP metamodel, which has been implemented by means of the Eclipse Modelling Framework. Our second contribution is an Eclipse-based B-SCP editor that enables business users to specify their strategic requirements and operational tasks. Our third contribution consists of model transformations to generate BPMN skeletons out of the B-SCP model, which were implemented by means of the Atlas Transformation Language.
[Context and motivation] Requirements engineers and stakeholders like to create informal, sketchy models in order to communicate ideas and to make them persistent. They prefer pen and paper over current software modeling tools, because the former allow for any kind of sketches and do not break the creative flow. [Question/problem] To facilitate requirements management, engineers then need to manually transform the sketches into more formal models of requirements. This is a tedious, time-consuming task. Furthermore, there is a risk that the original intentions of the sketched models and informal annotations get lost in the transition. [Principal ideas/results] We present the idea for a seamless, tool-supported transition from informal, sketchy drafts to more formal models such as UML diagrams. Our approach uses an existing sketch recognizer together with a dynamic library of modeling symbols. This library can be augmented and modified by the user anytime during the sketching/modeling process. Thus, an engineer can start sketching without any restrictions, and can add both syntax and semantics later. Or the engineer can define a domain-specific modeling language with any degree of formality and adapt it on the fly. [Contribution] In this paper we describe how our approach combines the advantages of modeling with the freedom and ease of sketching in a way other modeling tools cannot provide.
The increasing complexity of software systems makes Requirements Engineering activities both more important and more difficult. This article is about user requirements development, mainly the activities of documenting and analyzing user requirements for software-intensive systems. These are modeling activities that are useful for further Requirements Engineering activities. Current techniques for requirements modeling present a number of problems and limitations. Based on these shortcomings, a list of requirements for requirements modeling languages is proposed. The proposal of this article is to show how some extensions to SysML diagrams and tables can fulfill most of these requirements. The approach is illustrated by a list of user requirements for a Road Traffic Management System.
Software development processes have become highly complex with the increase in the complexity of software systems and their architectures. It is widely recognized that requirements engineering (RE) is a critical part of this process, along with the design of a system's software architecture with which to satisfy requirements. In this paper, we aim to provide a methodological approach for Architecture-oriented Model-Driven Requirements Engineering. We believe that considering architectural aspects for modeling requirements in a model-driven approach will provide software developers with several benefits such as an improvement in traceability, better architecture and implementation coherence. This paper presents the definition of a process which is based on the OpenUP method, including its activities, roles, and work products. We also provide an example of the use of this approach in a SOA-based software development project.
Requirements engineering is crucial to the success of software development. However, in many scientific computing projects, traditional requirements engineering practices are ignored. We claim that there is a need for methodologies, which help capturing and managing requirements for these projects, to collaboratively develop scientific software with greater interoperability. We propose a model-based approach to elicit and manage requirements in scientific computing projects. The proposed approach is based on a meta-model in order to deal with the high complexity and frequent change in scientific software development. The meta-model also provides abstractions and notations targeted at scientific computing projects. The approach supports requirements engineering in these projects with the flexibility of easily managing requirements versioning, trace ability and communication across the boundary of disciplines. A tool prototype is implemented. To evaluate the proposed approach, we applied it in scientific computing projects. The approach has showed its advantages in the application and promotes software engineering in these projects.
Requirements engineering is one of the most important and critical phases in the software development life cycle, and should be carefully performed to build high quality and reliable software. However, requirements are typically gathered through various sources and represented in natural language (NL), making requirements engineering a difficult, fault prone, and a challenging task. To address this challenge, we propose a model-based requirements verification method called NLtoSTD, which transforms NL requirements into a state transition diagram (STD) that can be verified through automated reasoning. This paper analyzes the effect of NLtoSTD method in improving the quality of requirements. To do so, we conducted an empirical study at North Dakota State University in which the participants employed the NLtoSTD method during the inspection of requirement documents to identify the amibiguities and incompleteness of requirements. The experiment results show that the proposed method is capable of finding ambiguities and missing functionalities in a set of NL requirements, and provided us with insights and feedback to improve the method. The results are promising and have motivated the refinement of NLtoSTD method and future empirical evaluation.
Numerous methods and techniques have been proposed for requirements modeling, although very few have had widespread use in practice. One drawback of requirements modeling methods is that they lack proper empirical evaluations. This means that there is a need for evaluation methods that consider both the theoretical and practical aspects of this type of methods and techniques. In this paper, we present a method for evaluating the quality of requirements modeling methods based on user perceptions. The evaluation method consists of a theoretical model that explains the relevant dimensions of quality for requirements modeling methods, along with a practical instrument with which to measure these quality dimensions. Basically, it allows us to predict the acceptance of a particular requirements modeling method in practice, based on the effort of applying the method, the quality of the requirements artifacts produced, and the user perceptions with regard to the quality of the method. The paper also presents an empirical test of the proposed method for evaluating a Rational Unified Process (RUP) extension for requirements modeling. That test was carried out through a family of experiments conducted with students and practitioners and provides evidence of the usefulness of the evaluation method proposed.
[Context and motivation] Self-adaptive systems (SAS) monitor and adapt to changing end-user requirements, operating context conditions, and resource availability. Specifying requirements for such dynamic systems is not trivial. Most of the research on self-adaptive systems (SAS) focuses on finding solutions to the requirements that SAS is built for. However, elicitation and representation of requirements for SAS has received less attention at early stages of requirements engineering (RE). [Question/problem] How to represent requirements for SAS in a way which can be read by non-engineering stakeholders? [Principal ideas/results] A requirements modeling language with a diagrammatic syntax to be used to elicit and represent requirements for SAS and perform analysis based on our recently proposed core ontology to perform RE for SAS. [Contribution] A modeling language, called Adaptive RML, for the representation of early requirements for Self-adaptive systems (SAS). The language has graphical primitives in line with classical goal modeling languages and is formalized via a mapping to Techne. Early validation is performed by modeling the same case study in an established goal modeling language and in Adaptive RML. The results suggest that context and resource concepts, as well as relegation and influence relations should be part of graphical modeling languages used to make early requirements models for SAS and to perform analysis over them.
Some quality attributes are known to have an impact on the overall architecture of a system, so that they are required to be properly handled from the early beginning of the software development. For example, adaptability is a key concern for autonomic and adaptive systems, which brings to them the capability to alter their behavior in response to changes on their surrounding environments. In this paper, we propose a Strategy for Transition between Requirements and Architectural Models for Adaptive systems (STREAM-A). In particular, we use goal models based on the i* (i-Star) framework to support the design and evolution of systems that require adaptability. To obtain software architectures for such systems, the STREAM-A approach uses model transformations from i* models to architectural models expressed in Acme. Both the requirements and the architectural model are refined to accomplish the adaptability requirement.
The current implementation of the SysML tends to be design-centric with minimal support for activities upstream of design such as product line engineering, goal conflict resolution and hazard/threat modeling. Furthermore, currently provided extensions, such as those for business modeling, tend to be narrowly focused. This paper describes ongoing research in providing systems engineering support for activities that take place prior to system requirements definition, including resolving goal conflicts, identifying and mitigating potential hazards and threats, and specifying features and feature variations in product lines. A new modeling language is proposed (referred to as the Unified Requirements Modeling Language). The core concepts of a single meta-model for requirements engineering are presented alongside exemplary usage showing the power of the language together with its graphical notation. The meta-model, for the first time, proposes a formal relationship between various types of actors, goals, requirements, product line components, and hazard and threat modeling artifacts that integrates with both UML and SysML.
Software behaviors have long been recognized to be essential components involved in requirements modelling process by many researchers both from academia and industry. In this paper, we propose a divide and conquer modeling method – Behavior based Requirements Modeling method (BRM), to modeling behaviors of software system. The target system is decomposed into sub-domains, ViewPoints(VPs), and scenarios at successive levels. Requirements modeling could be carried out in different VPs respectively. Behaviors of the target system are identified within each scenario. A formal description language – Behavior Description Language (BDL) is proposed to describe these behaviors, as well as the model of the target system.
Requirements engineers need to understand and model different aspects of organizations and systems under construction, and may need to use different modeling notations. However, most modeling tools support only one (or at most a few notations), hindering requirements engineers from using the most appropriate notations for the particular modeling task. The RE-Tools is an open-source toolkit implemented using a UML Profile for StarUML, an open-source UML modeling tool. The toolkit supports many leading requirements modeling notations, including the NFR Framework, the i* Framework, KAOS, Problem Frames, and UML. Each of these notations may be used for modeling independent corresponding diagrams or together with non-functional requirements (NFRs). The toolkit also supports the original qualitative reasoning of the NFR Framework and augments with a quantitative one.
Goal-Oriented Requirements Engineering (GORE) has received increasing attention over the past few years. There are several goal-oriented approaches, each one using different kinds of models. We argue that it would be useful to relate them or even perform transformations among them automatically, in order to understand their similarities and differences, their advantages and disadvantages, allowing a possible migration or comparison between approaches. This is something that has not received enough attention. In this paper we propose the definition and implementation of goal model transformations between i* and KAOS. As an immediate contribution, the approach can be used to migrate from one goal model to another through automatic model transformations. This approach also contributes to relate the concepts of i* and KAOS models and will help, for example, a development team in making the decision on which approach to follow, according to the nature of the project and the expressiveness of an approach to represent certain concepts (e.g., obstacles are represented explicitly in KAOS, but not in i*). Another contribution is to facilitate communication among members of the same team, if they are specialized in different approaches.
Textual specification documents do not represent a suitable starting point for software development. This issue is due to the inherent problems of natural language such as ambiguity, impreciseness and incompleteness. In order to overcome these shortcomings, experts derive analysis models such as requirements models. However, these models are difficult and costly to create manually. Furthermore, the level of abstraction of the models is too low, thus hindering the automated transformation process. We propose a novel approach which uses high abstraction requirements models in the form of Object System Models (OSMs) as targets for the transformation of natural language specifications in conjunction with appropriate text mining and machine learning techniques. OSMs allow the interpretation of the textual specification based on a small set of facts and provide structural and behavioral information. This approach will allow both (1) the enhancement of minimal specifications, and in the case of comprehensive specifications (2) the determination of the most suitable structure of reusable requirements.
Early stage requirements models are often documented using paper and pencil-based approaches. In our current research, we are exploring lightweight modeling tools and approaches that could provide a beneficial alternative. We have developed the FlexiSketch tool prototype which combines support for free-form sketching with lightweight metamodeling capabilities. This creates the possibility for an automatic transcription of the documented information in later modeling stages. The tool is designed to be used on tablet devices.
In this paper we show how the Property-Based Requirements (PBR) theory can be used to fully integrate Requirements Engineering (RE) into a Model-Based Systems Engineering (MBSE) method using OMG UML and its SysML profile. The objective is to avoid “in-parallel” management of two distinct expressions of the same specification (or design): once in a set of textual requirements and once in a model, which must be maintained to be consistent. This is achieved by the identification, in common modeling concepts, of Requirement Tracker Artifacts (RTA) that match the pattern defined by the Property-Based Requirement theory. An illustration is provided with both the UML and SysML modeling language. We also outline how relationships defined “by construction” in the model can be exploited to carry out requirements management activities without addition of dedicated and redundant data. © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
Educational games are essential in the next generation of e-learning tools because games stress visual and experiential learning; they require active involvement by student players while providing almost instantaneous feedback. The long term goal of this research project is to define a model-driven game engineering approach, SimSYS, that supports the rapid development of serious educational games across diverse educational topics. Here, we present our approach for modeling serious educational games, using tailored UML use cases (visual UML diagram and detailed tabular specifications). The tailored approach integrates features of storyboarding techniques (well-established in the game community), with use case modeling (well-established in the software engineering community). The use case model can be transformed into a formal XML representation that can be loaded by the SimSYS Game Play Engine. Part of a game on agile software development process is used for illustration.
Context A collaborative system is a special kind of software whose users can perform collaboration, communication and collaboration tasks. These systems usually have a high number of non-functional requirements, resulting from the users’ need of being aware of other users with whom to collaborate, that is, the workspace awareness. Objective This paper aims at evaluating two Requirements Engineering languages i* and CSRML (an extension of i*) in order to determine which is the most suitable one to specify requirements of collaborative systems, taking into account their special characteristics regarding collaboration and awareness. Method We performed a family of experiments comprising an original experiment and two replicas. They were performed by 30, 45 and 9 Computer Science students, respectively, from Spain and Argentina. These subjects filled in two understandability questionnaires once they analyzed the requirements models of two systems: an e-learning collaborative system and a conference review system with some collaborative aspects support. Both models were specified by using the evaluated languages. Results The statistical analysis of the family of experiments showed that the understandability was higher for the models specified with CSRML than for those specified with i*, especially for collaborative aspects. This result was also confirmed by the meta-analysis conducted. Conclusions CSRML surpasses i* when modeling collaborative systems requirements models due to the specific expressiveness introduced to represent collaboration between users and awareness and the new resorts to manage actors and roles.
Despite their important role in software development, scenarios suffer from several major drawbacks. To remedy these drawbacks, this paper presents a pattern language as means of connection between scenarios and their target models. The pattern language contains four patterns: Establishing the Story Line, Elaborating Things that Change, Identifying Agents and Their Interactions, and Unraveling the Goal and its Subgoals. Each of these patterns connects one aspect of a given scenario to a conceptual model and offers guidelines for converting this aspect into a target model. Together, these four patterns transform a scenario into four interrelated requirements models. These scenario aspects are identified according to the concepts of scenarios used in both Cognitive Science and Requirements Engineering. This paper first lays out the theoretical foundation of this pattern language and then gives a detailed description, illustration and assessment of this language.
The need for support related to the complexity management of systems engineering problems, specifically for requirements management and changes is especially necessary during the early stages of the systems engineering process. Indeed, these stages have a tremendous impact on the overall outcome of a project. If not anticipated at early stages, changes in requirements are leading to changes in the design and in the later implementation stages, resulting in an unexpected increase in costs (monetary, time, etc.). The framework proposed in this article for requirements change prediction consists of a three steps process. First, requirements are modeled using SysML with predefined relationships. Second, all the relationships between requirements in the SysML model are transformed into an adjacency matrix also named DSM. A higher order Dependency Structure Matrix is applied; this matrix-based methodology allows support in the prediction of which requirements will be affected after a change in a specific requirement. Third, the change propagation path is visualized. Using this framework, it is possible to predict the possible propagation of changes in requirements. In addition, it is also possible to identify the requirements that can be reused. This can help to save the time and cost for developing a new system.
Compared with traditional software applications, the requirements problem of Internetware applications exhibits a set of new characteristics that cannot be resolved by traditional engineer-centered face-to-face requirements methods. In this paper, we present an exploratory approach to the requirements elicitation and evolution problem of Internetware applications, based on the concept of web-enable collective intelligence, to accommodate the situation of large-scale user communities of Internetware applications with diverse and constantly evolving requirements. In particular, we propose a feature-oriented stigmergy-based collaborative requirements modeling method that combines feature-oriented requirements modeling with web-enabled stigmergy-based collaboration to support large-scale collaborative requirements eliciting and evolving activities for Internetware applications. Two experiments are introduced to show the feasibility and effectiveness of this approach.
The continuing high rate of advances in information and communication systems technology creates many new commercial opportunities but also engenders a range of new technical challenges around maximising systems’ dependability, availability, adaptability, and auditability. These challenges are under active research, with notable progress made in the support for dependable software design and management. Runtime support, however, is still in its infancy and requires further research. This paper focuses on a requirements model for the runtime execution and control of an intention-oriented Cloud-Based Application. Thus, a novel requirements modelling process referred to as Provision, Assurance and Auditing, and an associated framework are defined and developed where a given system’s non/functional requirements are modelled in terms of intentions and encoded in a standard open mark-up language. An autonomic intention-oriented programming model, using the Neptune language, then handles its deployment and execution.
Model-based requirements engineering supports eliciting, specifying and analyzing the work products elaborated during the requirements engineering process by providing adequate models. However, especially the inclusion of formal models needs to be investigated further. These models represent requirements and have to be integrated with reference models that define and structure the work results and their relations. We have developed the research tool MIRA to provide an infrastructure for the tool-based evaluation of the usage of models in the field of requirements engineering. In this paper we present the research questions addressed by MIRA concerning the reference model and the formal models. We explain how MIRA supports answering these research questions.
Context Over the years, several modeling languages for requirements have been proposed. These languages employ different conceptual approaches, including scenario-based and goal-oriented ones. Empirical studies providing evidence about requirements model comprehensibility are rare, especially when addressing languages that belong to different modeling approaches. Objective This work aims to compare the comprehensibility of requirements models expressed in different but comparable modeling approaches from a requirements analysts’ perspective. In particular, in this paper we compare the comprehensibility of requirements models expressed in two visual modeling languages: Use Case, which is scenario-based, and Tropos, which exploits goal-oriented modeling. We further compare the effort required for comprehending the different models, and the derived productivity in each case. Method Requirements model comprehensibility is measured here in the context of three types of tasks that analysts usually perform, namely mapping between textual description and the model elements, reading and understanding the model irrespectively of the original textual description, and modifying the model. This experimental evaluation has been conducted within a family of controlled experiments aiming at comparing the comprehensibility of Use Case and Tropos requirements models. Three runs of the experiment were performed, including a first experiment and two replications, involving 79 subjects overall (all of which were information systems students). The data for each experiment was separately analyzed, followed by a meta-analysis of the three experiments. Results The experimental results show that Tropos models seem to be more comprehensible with respect to the three types of requirements analysis tasks, although more time consuming than Use Case models. Conclusions Measuring model comprehensibility by means of controlled experiments is feasible and provides a basis for comparing Tropos and Use Case models, although these languages belong to different modeling approaches. Specifically, Tropos outperformed Use Case in terms of comprehensibility, but required more effort leading to a similar productivity of the two languages.
Two fundamental principles and values of agile methods are customer satisfaction by rapid delivery of useful software and the improvement of the communication process by continuous stakeholders' involvement. But, how to deal with customers' satisfaction and find a better visualization model at the requirements level (which stakeholders can understand and be involved) in an agile development context? Also, how this visualization model enhancement can guarantee consistency between agile requirements artefacts (e.g., user stories and domain models)? Thus, to answer these questions, this paper presents the SnapMind framework. This framework aims to make the requirements modelling process more user-centered, through the definition of a visual requirements language, based on mind maps, model-driven and domain specific language techniques. Moreover, through these techniques, the SnapMind framework focuses on support for consistency between user stories and the domain models using a model animation technique called snapshots. The framework was applied to an industrial case study to investigate its feasibility.
Innovative companies need an agile approach towards product and service requirements, to rapidly respond to and exploit changing conditions. The agile approach to requirements must nonetheless be systematic, especially with respect to accommodating legal and non-functional requirements. This paper examines how to support lightweight, agile requirements processes which can still be systematically modeled, analyzed and changed. We propose a framework, RE-KOMBINE, which is based on a propositional language for requirements modeling called Techne. We define operations on Techne models which tolerate the presence of inconsistencies. This paraconsistent reasoning is vital for supporting delayed commitment to particular design solutions. We evaluate these operations with an industry case study using two well-known formal analysis tools. Our evaluations show that the proposed framework scales to industry-sized requirements model, while still retaining (via propositional logic) the informality that is so useful during early requirements analysis.
In this research, we propose generic requirement model for Big Data application. The model offer the use of i× Framework and Knowledge Acquisition automated System (KAOS), which are part of Goal Oriented Requirement Engineering (GORE). Big Data applications handle flood of data that occurs from anything such as climate data, genomes, even just software logs or facebook status. To build such applications demands gathering special requirements specific for Big Data. A generic requirement model is proposed using i× and KAOS model. The model is constructed from analyzing the requirements based on the characteristics of Big Data and its challenges. This generic model is then applied to a case study in an Indonesian's government agency for development planning of West Java (UPTB Pusdalisbang Jawa Barat). The result of this application has demonstrated that the model can be used to generate a valid software requirement specification.
The use of models in requirements engineering (RE) for software-intensive embedded systems is considered beneficial. The main advantages of requirements models as documentation format are that they facilitate requirements understanding and foster automatic analysis techniques. However, natural language (NL) is still the dominant documentation format for requirements specifications, particularly in the domain of embedded systems. This is due to the facts that NL-based requirements can be used within legally binding documents and are more appropriate for reviews than models. In order to bridge the gap between both of these documentation formats, this paper proposes a model-driven RE methodology that makes use of requirements models along with a controlled natural language. The methodology combines the advantages of model-based and NL-based documentation by means of a bidirectional multi-step model transformation between both documentation formats. We illustrate the approach by means of an automotive example, explain the particular steps of the model transformation, and present performance results.
Model-based systems engineering (MBSE) is intended to enhance productivity and quality through a paradigm shift from document-centric engineering. However, most MBSE development tools require the manual creation of requirement constructs. This time consuming step is vulnerable to human error, and must be repeated as high-level designs inevitably evolve. This paper describes a capability that uses SysML structure and behavior diagrams to automatically generate textual requirements. Using modified off-the-shelf MBSE software, information is extracted from SysML constructs (e.g., blocks, states, activities) and combined in SysML requirement objects. The requirement syntax conforms to NASA and DoD standards. Requirements are based on SysML construct relationships (e.g., allocations, control flows, object flows) commonly used in diagrams to describe system architectures and designs. Through the embedded error checker, designers can ensure that requirements are complete and consistent. When new requirement constructs are created, traceability to the “parent” SysML constructs is automatically created to capture the rationale. As the architectural models evolve, the requirements are updated to ensure consistency with configuration management and other model-based tools. Such an approach allows designers to quickly assess the impact of requirement changes and reduces requirement management costs. The capability is demonstrated by comparing model generated requirements to a traditionally developed GPS receiver specification.
[Context and motivation] Regulatory requirements for Nuclear instrumentation and control (I&C) systems are first class requirements. They are written by national safety entities and are completed through a large documentation set of national recommendation guides and national/international standards. [Question/Problem] I&C systems important to safety must comply to all of these requirements. The global knowledge of this domain is scattered through these different documents and not formalized. Its organization and traceability relationships within this domain is mainly implicit. As a consequence, such long lasting nuclear I&C projects set important challenges in terms of tacit expertise capitalization and domain analysis. [Principal ideas/results] To tackle this domain formalization issue, we propose a dual Model-driven Engineering (MDE) and Information Retrieval (IR) approach to address the nuclear regulatory requirements domain definition, and assisted traceability based on the acquired requirements model. [Contributions] In this paper, we present the Connexion metamodel that provides a canvas for the definition and capitalization of the nuclear regulatory requirements domain. We also present an hybrid MDE/IR-based approach, named INCREMENT, for acquiring, modeling and analyzing these regulatory requirements. This approach is supported by a tool that is developed in the context of the CONNEXION project, which gathers French major nuclear I&C industrial actors.
Context Following the evolution of the business needs, the requirements of software systems change continuously and new requirements emerge frequently. Requirements documents are often textual artifacts with structure not explicitly given. When a change in a requirements document is introduced, the requirements engineer may have to manually analyze all the requirements for a single change. This may result in neglecting the actual impact of a change. Consequently, the cost of implementing a change may become several times higher than expected. Objective In this paper, we aim at improving change impact analysis in requirements by using formal semantics of requirements relations and requirements change types. Method In our previous work we present a requirements metamodel with commonly used requirements relation types and their semantics formalized in first-order logic. In this paper the classification of requirements changes based on structure of a textual requirement is provided with formal semantics. The formalization of requirements relations and changes is used for propagating proposed changes and consistency checking of proposed changes in requirements models. The tool support for change impact analysis in requirements models is an extension of our Tool for Requirements Inferencing and Consistency Checking (TRIC). Results The described approach for change impact analysis helps in the elimination of some false positive impacts in change propagation, and enables consistency checking of changes. Conclusion We illustrate our approach in an example which shows that the formal semantics of requirements relations and change classification enables change alternatives to be proposed semi-automatically, the reduction of some false positive impacts and contradicting changes in requirements to be determined.
The creation of a consistent system description is a challenging problem of requirements engineering. Formal and informal reasoning can greatly contribute to meet this challenge. However, this demands that formal and informal reasoning and the system description are connected in such a way that the reasoning permits drawing conclusions about the system description. We describe an incremental approach to requirements modelling and validation that incorporates formal and informal reasoning. Our main contribution is an approach to requirements tracing that delivers the necessary connection that links the reasoning to the system description. Formal refinement is used in order to deal with large and complex system descriptions. We discuss tool support for our approach to requirements tracing that combines informal requirements modelling with formal modelling and verification while tracing requirements among each other and into the formal model.
Aspect-oriented modeling (AOM) has been developed to modularize crosscutting concerns appropriately in UML models. In software engineering, aspects are concerns that cut across multiple modules. In requirements modeling, we analyze interactions and potential inconsistencies. We use UML to model requirements in a use case driven approach. During requirements specification a structural model of the problem domain is captured with a class diagram. Use cases refined by activities are the join points to compose crosscutting concerns. Graph transformation systems provide analysis support for detecting potential conflicts and dependencies between rule-based transformations.
Requirement development activities such as requirements analysis and modelling are well defined in software engineering. A model-based requirement development may result in significant improvements in engineering design. In current product development activities in this domain, not all requirements are consciously identified and modelled. This paper presents the checklist-oriented requirements analysis modelling (CORAMOD) approach. CORAMOD is a methodology for the use of model-based systems engineering for requirements analysis of complex products utilizing checklists, the simplest kind of rational design method. The model-based focuses the requirements analysis process on requirement modelling, whereas the checklist encourages a conscious and systematic approach to identify requirements. We illustrate the utility of CORAMOD artefacts by a comprehensive case study example and modelling with system modelling language (SysML). We suggest that visual accessibility of the SysML views facilitates the full participation of all stakeholders and enables the necessary dialogue and negotiation. The approach promotes tracing derived requirements to the customer need statement and enhances validation by model execution and simulation.
This paper focuses on object-oriented software engineering (OOSE)-based software development life cycle (SDLC) for requirement analysis, design, and development of a Web collaborative public participatory geographic information system (PPGIS) (Co-PPGIS) infrastructure. Despite its importance, requirement engineering phase remains a neglected area in the geographical information system (GIS)-based SDLC. The absence of research and standardized requirement engineering (RE) process is more noticeable in the case of PPGIS applications, which are employed during municipality management, municipality planning, quick response, etc. This paper intends to introduce and suggest an OOSE standard requirement capturing model for the development of Web online Co-PPGIS. Using the unified modeling language (UML) Web-based Engineering (UWE) framework as the baseline, techniques for requirement elicitation, tailored for specific needs of synchronous collaborative PPGIS, are presented. Moreover, the requirement-gathering techniques range from checklists to creating user personas; the Web-based PPGIS aspect is handled through categorization of functional and non-functional requirements, including that of Web content and map visualization. Future work includes incorporation of UML-based requirement analysis and requirement validation techniques to complete the model. It is hoped with this research and better understanding of techniques and available methodology that requirement engineering practices will become widespread and contribute in adoption of a standardized RE process life cycle for PPGIS applications. Also, it is hypothesized that the Co-PPGIS would help to increase the degree to which the citizen, local bodies, environmental assessment, government agencies, and decision authorities work at the same time by using the single platform but at different locations with a lower cost and more effective real-time collaborative communication channels, partially due to the adoption of real-time geo-collaborative groupware technologies and OOSE-based requirement capturing methodology for the development of Co-PPGIS mapsharing mechanism.
Defining security requirements is of prime importance for all systems; we usually study the generic ones like confidentiality, integrity, availability, authentication, non-repudiation and privacy. It is thus imperative to evaluate all the possible extended requirements. A literature review has shown that there are various and different security requirements models, some of which are examined and others are neglected. Moreover, security lacks a unified taxonomy of security requirements. In this paper, we refer to the variety of security requirements models from the literature to drive an aggregate model and move away from the individualistic proposed taxonomy to a hierarchical and standard security requirement model. We define and propose a novel and holistic security requirement taxonomy at two levels of abstraction that incorporates 13 basic and standard requirements and then refined in layers into 31 security requirements sub-factors. These requirements are discussed in the open literature. Our taxonomy offers a good understanding of security constraints relevant to the system functions in the field of computer security. When it comes to decision making, it is recommended to establish which security measures should be relevant to the entire security requirements taxonomy.
A Data Warehouse (DW) is one of the main components of every BI system. It has been convincingly argued that the success of BI projects can be strongly affected by the Requirements Engineering (RE) phase, when the requirements of a DW are captured. Multiple RE methods for DWs have been proposed which have goal models in the core of their approach. Existing methods cover RE up to the static part of a DW, where the Multidimensional (MD) model is obtained. However, the RE for the dynamic part of the DW, where the requirements of operations on the DW are captured, has been neglected in the literature. In this paper, we propose a RE method, covering both the static and the dynamic part of a DW in an integrated manner. Our approach is to use the concept of a Key Performance Indicator (KPI). We initially use KPIs as the main driver to obtain the MD model and then discuss how decision-makers analyse them in order to measure the success of an organisation. In our method, the goal model from the i* framework was extended with UML use case diagrams.
Web engineering has emerged as a new software discipline to specifically address the challenges and complexities of developing high quality web applications. A main theme in different web engineering methodologies is to employ model driven development approaches. This increases the level of abstraction and formalism to the extent that machines can better involve in the development process and provide more automation, e.g. automatic code generation from the models. Despite their benefits, a main problem of these model-driven methodologies is that developing each new web application implies creating a probably large number of models from scratch. Hence, model reuse can be considered as the main solution to this problem. In this paper, a semantic web enabled approach is proposed for reusing models, specifically functional requirements models. It takes the brief description of the functional requirements of a new web application in terms of UML use case diagram, and semi-automatically generates the draft of the corresponding detailed description in terms of a set of UML activity diagrams. This is performed by utilizing a repository which contains semantic representation of the models of the previous web applications. The proposed approach is based on novel algorithms for annotating activity diagrams, measuring similarity of use cases, and adapting activity diagrams. The experimental evaluations demonstrate that the proposed approach is promising, and it has good precision and effectiveness.
By the existing innovation design methods of product family, people can get new products design effectively. However, these methods cannot make their products to meet customers’ demands completely, because they cannot help people to turn customers’ demands into products characteristics using model methods. This paper uses Kano requirement model to find essential demands, clarify customers’ demands, and utilizes extension innovation methods to establish models for the products, which have different characteristics, then uses extensive analysis and extension transformations to obtained new products designs, and finally get innovation designs of product family according to superiority evaluation methods.
Product requirement modeling is a process that the product requirement information is collected, analyzed, structured and converted to the design specification, it is the determinant of the ability to quickly respond to the diverse requirements of customers. This paper presents a product requirement modeling method based on configuration design, which uses “tabular layouts of article characteristics” (SML) technology to conduct the formal expression of product requirement information element. The function structure model and its optimization algorithm are proposed. Enterprises can use the model to interact with customers about requirements and obtain the model which can be manufactured. The customer individual requirements can be satisfied according to the mapping rules of models. Finally, an example of enterprise application is given to illustrate practical application of the research.
Modern software systems operate within the context of larger socio-technical systems, wherein they interact—by exchanging data and outsourcing tasks—with other technical components, humans, and organisations. When interacting, these components (actors) operate autonomously; as such, they may disclose confidential information without being authorised, wreck the integrity of private data, rely on untrusted third parties, etc. Thus, the design of a secure software system shall begin with a thorough analysis of its socio-technical context, thereby considering not only technical attacks, but also social and organisational ones. In this paper, we propose the STS approach for modelling and reasoning about security requirements. In STS, security requirements are specified, via the STS-ml requirements modelling language, as contracts that constrain the interactions among the actors in the socio-technical system. The requirements models of STS-ml have a formal semantics which enables automated reasoning for detecting possible conflicts among security requirements as well as conflicts between security requirements and actors' business policies. We apply STS to a case study about e-Government, and report on promising scalability results of our implementation.
Various drivers, especially increasing market dynamics, force industrial enterprises to evolve their production facilities ever more frequently. Analyzing the impact of changed requirements on the production facilities early in the engineering process would facilitate the estimation of resulting costs and therefore reduce project risk. In industrial practice, requirements specifications are typically textual lists and only structured by a table of contents; an analysis of the impact of changes within the requirements specification is extensive, as no documented information is available about how the requirements and other elements of the requirements specification depend on each other. To identify impacts of changes in a requirements specification more efficiently, this paper proposes a model-based approach that classifies the elements of a requirements specification according to their contents and based on the classification preselects automatically candidate elements of the requirements specification that are possibly affected by the change. This paper shows the application of the approach on the manufacturing automation systems domain by means of a pick and place unit (PPU) demonstrator. The technical validation demonstrates that in the example of the PPU the impact analysis is more efficient with a content model than on an unstructured list; the effort for impact analysis is reduced further when adapting the content model to the manufacturing automation systems domain.
Model-based systems engineering (MBSE) is a discipline of systems engineering in which the model forms the heart of all the systems engineering activities and is the basis of many of the project artefacts. Systems modeling is no longer viewed as simply a “good idea” but is becoming an increasingly important part of any systems engineering project. The application of MBSE is becoming well understood at the systems level; however, there is a lack of research and subsequent industrial application at the system of systems (SoS) level. This paper presents a model-based approach to requirements engineering for SoSs. The approach is derived from an MBSE approach to requirements engineering and therefore represents current best practice in SoSs in terms of established standards and research. This paper builds upon and is an evolution of the initial foundations for model-based requirements engineering for systems of systems that were published in an earlier paper.
In the field of design, it is accepted that users’ perceptions of systems are influenced by emotion as much as cognition, and functionally-complete products will not be adopted if they do not appeal to emotions. While software engineering methodologies have matured to handle non-functional requirements such as usability, what has not been investigated fully is the emotional needs of people. That is, what do users want to feel, and how do they feel about a system? In this paper, we argue that these emotional desires should be treated as first-class citizens in software engineering methodology, and present preliminary work on including emotions in requirements models using emotional goals. We evaluate these models both with a controlled user study, and on a case study of emergency systems for older people. The results of the controlled user study indicate that people are comfortable interpreting and modifying our models, and view the inclusion of emotions as first-class entities as a positive step in software engineering. The results of our case study indicate that current emergency systems fail to address the emotional needs their users, leading to low adoption and low usage. We conceptualised, designed, and prototyped an improved emergency system, and placed it into the homes of nine older people over a period of approximately two weeks each, showing improved user satisfaction over existing systems.
User requirements for software development are getting more complicated and are changing all the time. Not only should the requirements engineering process be well-organized but requirements change management should also be effective, especially for complex systems. However, the software engineering methodology employed can also make requirements change difficult to manage. Object-oriented software engineering using unified modeling language (UML) describes software systems by providing multiple views and diagrams. Therefore, software development with UML needs effective requirements change management. This study proposed a requirements change management model for object-oriented methodology with UML. In order to demonstrate the proposed model, business models from the selected case study, Mission Hospital Phuket, were chosen as the user requirements for the prototype system. Two aspects of the proposed system's performance were evaluated in the research laboratory: (1) users' expectation and (2) users' satisfaction.
Requirements Engineering (RE) tools and more generally the whole Software Engineering toolchain follow the strong trend towards web-based interface. This allows the analyst to use their tools in a "Software as a Service" mode either from a local company server or directly in the Cloud. Such deployments also ease toolchain integration by connecting their respective API through secured web-services, possibly using specific software lifecycle interoperability standards. In this tool demonstration, we illustrate the results of the rewrite process of a major Requirements Engineering tool towards this purpose. Our tooling has the following key features: (i) it supports rich requirements models based on goal-oriented RE, (ii) it is implemented as a collaborative concept server based on Eclipse Modelling technology and (iii) it exposes a REST interface supporting model building, diagram edition, history retrieval, snapshot management, collaborative mode, user authentication and project management. The following scenarios will be demonstrated (1) collaborative edition of a shared RE model, (2) rich service composition with application lifecycle management tools and (3) easy web-component integration in third-party web interfaces.
Formal models of software requirements facilitate automated analysis and verification of the models, and software testing as well. A challenging problem in requirements modeling for real-time embedded software is to devise an easy-to-use formal requirements modeling language and a corresponding requirements modeling approach. Timed Abstract State Machine, abbreviated as TASM, is an easy-to-use formal requirements modeling language, but it has its limitations. We have extended TASM. In this paper, we propose an extended TASM-based requirements modeling approach for real-time embedded software to identify the parallel and hierarchical components, and describe the functional and non-functional requirements of the software. We apply the proposed approach to model requirements of actual real-time embedded software to validate its effectiveness. Our study highlights several lessons for modeling requirements of real-time embedded software in the extended TASM.
Requirements analysis activities underpin the success of the software development lifecycle. Subsequent errors in the requirements models can propagate to models in later phases and become much costlier to fix. Errors in requirement analysis are more likely in developing complex systems. Particularly, errors due to miscommunication and misinterpretation of a client׳s intentions are common. Ontologies relying on formal descriptions of semantics have often been used in multi agent systems (MAS) development to support various activities and generally improve the complex systems produced. However, their use during requirements analysis to validate match with the client׳s conceptualisation is largely unexplored. This article presents an ontology driven validation process to support requirement analysis of MAS models. This process is underpinned by an agent-based metamodel that describes commonly used informal agent requirement models. The process concurrently and incrementally validates the informal MAS requirement models produced. The synthesis of the process is first justified and illustrated in a manual tracing of the process. The paper then describes an interactive support tool to harness the formal semantics of ontologies and by pass the costly manual effort. The validation process is evaluated and illustrated using three case studies.
This paper presents a cloud-enhanced modelling language for capturing and describing cloud computing environments, enabling developers to model and reason about security issues in cloud systems from a security requirements engineering perspective. Our work builds upon concepts from the Secure Tropos methodology, where in this paper we introduce novel cloud computing concepts, relationships and properties in order to carry out analysis and produce cloud security requirements. We illustrate our concepts through a case study of a cloud-based career office system from the University of the Aegean. Finally we discuss how our cloud modelling language enriches cloud models with security concepts, guiding developers of cloud systems in understanding cloud vulnerabilities and mitigation strategies through semi-automated security analysis.
Software systems can fail when requirement constraints are overlooked or violated. With the increased complexity of software systems, software development has become more reliant on model driven development. The paper advocates a model driven approach to ensure real-time requirement constraints are taken into account prior to the design of a multi-agent system (MAS). The paper presents the synthesis of a real-time metamodel to support requirements analysis of a MAS. The metamodel describes a collection of modelling units and constraints that can be used to identify the real-time requirements of a multi-agent system during the analysis phase. The paper takes the view that the earlier you model real-time requirements in the software development life cycle, the more reliable and robust the resultant system will be. Furthermore, the more likely it is an appropriate balance between competing time requirements will be achieved. The paper also presents a validation of the metamodel in a Call Management MAS application. This provides a preliminary evidence of the coverage and validity of the metamodel presented.
The OpenOrbiter CubeSat Development Initiative is working to build a small spacecraft system using open source software and open hardware principles. Some important design considerations for the CubeSat are nonfunctional requirements. The key contribution of this work is presenting the design of a requirement engineering tool that can be used to speed up the requirement elicitation and specification of system-wide qualities such as availability, performance, and security based on the use of quality attribute scenarios. A prototype application, utilizing the concept of quality attribute scenarios which was originally proposed by the Carnegie Mellon Software Engineering Institute (SEI), was designed and implemented. These quality attribute scenarios are the equivalent of UML scenarios and use-cases. They are built specifically to document the nonfunctional requirements and use a quality scenario template.
With the increasing of complexity of complex mechatronic products, it is necessary to involve multidisciplinary design teams, thus, the traditional customer requirements modeling for a single discipline team becomes difficult to be applied in a multidisciplinary team and project since team members with various disciplinary backgrounds may have different interpretations of the customers’ requirements. A new synthesized multidisciplinary customer requirements modeling method is provided for obtaining and describing the common understanding of customer requirements (CRs) and more importantly transferring them into a detailed and accurate product design specifications (PDS) to interact with different team members effectively. A case study of designing a high speed train verifies the rationality and feasibility of the proposed multidisciplinary requirement modeling method for complex mechatronic product development. This proposed research offersthe instruction to realize the customer-driven personalized customization of complex mechatronic product.
Self-adaptation approaches appear to respond to environmental complexity and uncertainty of today’s software systems. However, in order to prepare the system with the capability of self-adaptation requires a specific strategy, including when conducting stage requirements modeling. Activity of requirements modeling to be very decisive, when selecting and entering new elements to be added. Here we adopt a feedback loop as a strategy of self-adaptation, which is integrated into a goal-based approach as an approach to requirements. This paper discusses the integration of the two approaches, with the aim of obtaining a new model, which has the advantages of both.
The introduction of modular design increases complexity within product development and especially within Requirements Engineering. To handle this complexity, the approach of Model Based Systems Engineering is applied in this contribution. First, the origins of complexity in modular product development are introduced. Key challenges within Requirements Engineering are drawn up and then verified. A modeling method for requirements of modular kits is introduced and validated in the series development of hybrid drivetrain systems at a German automotive manufacturer. Increases in quality and a requirements reusability of over 80% were achieved. Thus, the capability of the modeling method is verified.
We present CoSTest, a tool that supports the validation of Conceptual Schemas by using testing. The tool implements techniques for transforming instantiations from a Requirements Model into test case implementations by supporting a Model-driven architecture.
Specifying system requirements (SysReqs) is a critical activity in complex systems development. The SysReqs and emerging architecture are constructed through gradual and iterative transition from the problem domain and operational stakeholder requirements to the conceptual solution domain. They later constitute the basis for functional requirements elaborating, concept formation, technology selection, function-to-form allocation, and asset utilization. Only rarely can stakeholder requirements (SHRs) readily translate to SysReqs. Systems engineers must therefore elicit, analyze, and evolve the SysReqs, as these will radically affect the system's performance, robustness, endurance, and appeal. Model-Based Systems Engineering (MBSE) provides a framework for effective and consistent systems engineering and architecting. MBSE relies on modeling languages, such as Object-Process Methodology (OPM). OPM is a holistic MBSE paradigm and language for complex systems and processes, standardized as ISO 19450, which relies on the principle of minimal universal ontology. In this paper, we propose a model-based requirement engineering (MBRE) approach to facilitate the transition from SHRs to SysReqs, and from SysReqs to system architecture specification. We demonstrate the applicability of this framework in architecting a robotic baggage loading system for a leading international airport.
Business Intelligence (BI) systems help organisations to monitor the fulfillment of business goals by means of tracking various Key Performance Indicators (KPIs). Data Warehouses (DWs) supply data to compute KPIs and therefore, are an important component of any BI system. While designing a DW to monitor KPIs, the following two important questions arise: (1) What data should be stored in a DW to measure a KPI, and (2) how the data should be modelled in a DW? We present a model-based Requirement Engineering (RE) framework to answer these questions. Our proposal consists of two major modelling components, namely, the context modelling component which is used to represent why and which data is required, and data modelling component which is used to model data as a multidimensional model.
For several decades, a wide-spread consensus concerning the enormous importance of an in-depth clarification of the specifications of a product has been observed. A weak clarification of specifications is repeatedly listed as a main cause for the failure of product development projects. Requirements, which can be defined as the purpose, goals, constraints, and criteria associated with a product development project, play a central role in the clarification of specifications. The collection of activities which ensure that requirements are identified, documented, maintained, communicated, and traced throughout the life cycle of a system, product, or service can be referred to as “requirements engineering”. These activities can be supported by a collection and combination of strategies, methods, and tools which are appropriate for the clarification of specifications. Numerous publications describe the strategy and the components of requirements management. Furthermore, recent research investigates its industrial application. Simultaneously, promising developments of graph-based design languages for a holistic digital representation of the product life cycle are presented. Current developments realize graph-based languages by the diagrams of the Unified Modelling Language (UML), and allow the automatic generation and evaluation of multiple product variants. The research presented in this paper seeks to present a method in order to combine the advantages of a conscious requirements management process and graph-based design languages. Consequently, the main objective of this paper is the investigation of a model-based integration of requirements in a product development process by means of graph-based design languages. The research method is based on an in-depth analysis of an exemplary industrial product development, a gear system for so-called “Electrical Multiple Units” (EMU). Important requirements were abstracted from a gear system specification list and were analyzed in detail. As a second basis, the research method uses a conscious expansion of graph-based design languages towards their applicability for requirements management. This expansion allows the handling of requirements through a graph-based design language model. The first two results of the presented research consist of a model of the gear system and a detailed model of requirements, both modelled in a graph-based design language. Further results are generated by a combination of the two models into one holistic model.
The dawn of the fourth industrial revolution, Industry 4.0 has created great enthusiasm among companies and researchers by giving them an opportunity to pave the path towards the vision of a connected smart factory ecosystem. However, in context of automotive industry there is an evident gap between the requirements supported by the current automotive manufacturing execution systems (MES) and the requirements proposed by industrial standards from the International Society of Automation (ISA) such as, ISA-95, ISA-88 over which the Industry 4.0 is being built on. In this paper, we bridge this gap by following a model-based requirements engineering approach along with a gap analysis process. Our work is mainly divided into three phases, (i) automotive MES tool selection phase, (ii) requirements modeling phase, (iii) and gap analysis phase based on the modeled requirements. During the MES tool selection phase, we used known reliable sources such as, MES product survey reports, white papers that provide in-depth and comprehensive information about various comparison criteria and tool vendors list for the current MES landscape. During the requirement modeling phase, we specified requirements derived from the needs of ISA-95 and ISA-88 industrial standards using the general purpose Systems Modeling Language (SysML). During the gap analysis phase, we find the misalignment between standard requirements and the compliance of the existing software tools to those standards.
Activities of specification, analysis and design of real-time systems (RTS) are highly dependent on an effective understanding of the application domain and on the thorough representation of their basic requirements. Model-based approaches using modeling languages such as UML are often applied to contribute to handle complexity of RTS development. However, UML alone does not completely represent important features associated with these systems, such as relationship with hardware elements and an effective representation of timing constraints. This article explores the combined use of UML and its profiles SysML and MARTE for modeling hardware and software requirements of RTS, with application to a case of controlling urban road traffic. The SysML profile alone does not present the representation of temporal, behavioral and performance requirements. The MARTE profile provides key resources to specify non-functional requirements for RTS, in addition to a clear description of the various relevant aspects of requirements definition of RTS, as for instance, temporal aspects and constraints. The main objective is to present the combined application of SysML with MARTE stereotypes, which enables the specification of different features of individual software requirements. Thus, in addition to the factors mentioned above, we can say that the proposed approach has an important role to specify RTS at different levels of detail and levels of abstraction.
Internet-based solutions, enhanced by Internet of Things (IoT) and Cloud computing, are constantly driving revolutionary approaches in multiple domains, including healthcare. Indicatively, telemedicine, real-time diagnosis and remote monitoring of patients, are expected to transform the healthcare domain. These systems may offer several services of different criticality, necessitating safety-/mission-critical core components and non-critical peripheral components; in other words, they are complex, mixed-criticality System-of-Systems (SoS). To understand and design such systems, engineers must be facilitated with the appropriate modeling tools. In this work, we explore the application of model-based design, using the Systems Modeling Language (SysML), of IoT e-Health systems, emphasizing criticality requirements. We focus on the Remote Elderly Monitoring System (REMS) use case, combining IoT technologies with classic healthcare practices, to demonstrate the potential of the proposed approach. Requirements comprise a basic concept of a systematic model-driven methodology that enables the successful management of the criticalities in system design, implementation and deployment. In the REMS use case, identified criticalities are modeled as SysML requirements, while SysML constraints and parametric diagrams are employed to describe and verify quantitative criticality requirements.
About 90% of the innovations on today’s vehicles are driven by electrics/electronics or software functions. This shifts the focus from a component-oriented perspective to a function-oriented view in engineering. At the same time, descriptions of systems and subsystems are required in order to coordinate collaboration with suppliers. These different views on the system under development essentially affect requirements engineering. On the one hand, information have to be provided, e.g., for requirement specifications for single systems. On the other hand, requirements have to be defined for functions realized on different systems and subsystems. This paper presents a concept for model-based requirement engineering supporting to gather and provide requirements needed for different views within the automotive development process. The concept presented is based on five partial models representing the emerging automotive system from an abstract concept (use cases) to a solution (system structure). Each of the partial models, namely use cases, functions, function realization, system structure and product structure are described with regard to required artifacts and their relations based on object-oriented modeling. These artifacts and relations serve for the allocation of requirements or can be specified by existing requirements. The proposed concept support different views upon the vehicle system and allow to generate structured, consistent documents, like requirements specifications for single systems within the development process. At the same time, the impact of changes concerning single requirements, use cases, functions or systems can be analyzed. The application of the proposed concept is highlighted using the example of an electric vehicle.
The paper presents an approach to the agile requirements engineering based on the OWL ontologies. A brief overview of the benefits of an ontology-based approach to requirements engineering is given. Attention is focused on agile engineering requirements process. The proposed approach uses three ontologies. The first ontology is used to represent knowledge about the agile requirements engineering process. The second ontology is designed to match natural language sentences with the requirements in order to identify conflicts. The third ontology is used to accumulate the knowledge about the domain of the software product. The first ontology is core. This ontology consists of classes corresponding to events, roles and artefacts of agile development. Object properties established between the individuals of class can be used to identify directly or indirectly linked requirements and requirements artefacts. This enables maintaining requirements traceability. Also the ontology takes into account particular qualities of working with the requirements in agile development processes including knowledge about the criteria for assessing the quality of user stories that is the most common form to record the requirements in agile methods. The ontologies are implemented in the Protégé environment.
Goal-Oriented Requirements Engineering approaches, in which the KAOS framework plays a key role, have been widely used for eliciting software requirements because they provide an easier way of communicating among stakeholders. However, the goal-oriented requirements modeling is not an easy way for novice requirements engineers. These professionals need more support in creating KAOS models. Recent studies have focused on the applicability of Artificial Intelligence techniques (e.g., Natural Language Processing – NLP) to support Requirements Engineering activities. In this sense, this paper aims to describe a way to support requirements elicitation for novice requirements engineers through the use of NLP within a chatbot. The chatbot (KAOSbot) acts as a KAOS modeling assistant. To evaluate our hypotheses about perceived efficacy from the novice requirements engineers perspective, we performed a quasi-experiment concerning KAOSbot’s perceived ease of use, perceived usefulness and intention to use. The results show that KAOSbot tool is a promising approach for specifying KAOS models because it was perceived as easy to use, useful, and the participants intend to use it in the future.
Requirements and their models often evolve to reflect changing needs, technologies, and regulations. The decision to implement proposed changes to requirements models relies on means to capture and analyze the potential impact of such changes. The User Requirements Notation (URN) is a standardized requirements modeling language that incorporates two complementary views based on Use Case Maps (UCM), for expressing scenarios and processes bound to architectural components, and on the Goal-oriented Requirement Language (GRL), for capturing the goals of actors and their relationships. This paper presents a new Change Impact Analysis (CIA) approach for URN models. Following a proposed change, this approach helps identify potentially impacted URN constructs within the selected GRL/UCM view, as well as throughout other view elements connected with URN links. This URN-oriented CIA approach is implemented as an extension of the jUCMNav modeling environment, and its applicability is demonstrated using an illustrative URN specification and three real and publicly available specifications. Furthermore, an empirical study involving 10 participants is used to assess the accuracy of this approach in identifying impacted URN elements upon specification changes. Results indicate excellent accuracy and a significant reduction in user-perceived difficulty when estimating the impact of changes in URN specifications.
Manufacturing systems are going through strategic changes to move from current massive customization production process towards new digital models - also called Industry 4.0. Process planning for this new approaches demand artificial intelligent and requirements modeling that should be formally verified. Therefore, requirements for manufacturing - eventually distributed - processes should be formalized and analyzed to lead to effective smart solutions. Goal-oriented requirements appear as a suitable approach to requirements but still need a formal representation that could deal with discrete distributed plants. Finding such representation is a key issue to model and verify requirements. This paper presents a method and a framework to put together goal-oriented requirements and Petri Nets, as an alternative to the requirements for manufacturing systems capable to deal with digital twins. A classic example associated to a car manufacturing plant is also presented to illustrate the method.
Prototyping is an effective and efficient way of requirement validation to avoid introducing errors in the early stage of software development. However, manually developing a prototype of a software system requires additional efforts, which would increase the overall cost of software development. Based on our proposed approach, we develop RM2PT: a tool for generating prototypes from requirements models automatically. A requirements model consists of a use case diagram, a conceptual class diagram, system sequence diagrams for use cases, and the formal contracts of their system operations in OCL (Object Constraint Language). RM2PT can generate executable MVC (Model View Controller) prototypes from requirements models automatically. We evaluate the tool with four case studies. 93.65% of requirement specifications can be generated to the executable Java source code successfully, and only 6.35% are non-executable for our current provided generation algorithm such as sorting and event-call, which can be implemented by developers manually or invoking the APIs of advanced algorithms in Java library. The tool is efficient that the one second generated prototype of a case study requires approximate nine hours manual implementation by skilled programmers.
Modeling the system's specifications from the functionality perspective is an important step in analyzing the software requirements. UML use case diagram is one of the most used functional modeling techniques in the software development process. This paper provides an approach to generate the UML use case diagrams from the requirements text using natural language processing. The approach consists of several steps to process the requirements text. Starting with filtering the text from the mistakes and going through natural language processes till generating the use case diagrams. Experimental evaluations have been done on several public software projects to demonstrate the accuracy of the proposed approach.
Understanding interdependency among requirements is one of the success factors in software development. Information on requirements interdependency explicitly and implicitly resided various design artifacts or diagrams. A software requirements specification document is the artifact delivered in the early phase of development. It drives its following development processes. It also contains information on interdependencies among the requirements, such as similar, part-of, and elaborate. This study proposes an approach to model the requirement dependency graph for a software requirements specification document. There is an extraction process for Text Preprocessing, which includes of Tokenization, Stopword Removal, and Stemming. Besides, there is a process of measuring semantic similarity through WS4J (WordNet Similarity for Java). The results of the extraction process, combined with Greedy Algorithms as the optimum value solution approach. Besides, a method for calculating similarity was used through the practices of Wu Palmer and Levenshtein. At the end of this process, Reliability is performed using the Gwet’s AC1 formula.
Some authors suggest that transitioning requirements engineering from the traditional statements in natural language with shall clauses to model-based requirements within a Model-Based Systems Engineering (MBSE) environment could improve communication, requirements traceability, and system decomposition, among others. Requirement elements in the Systems Modeling Language (SysML) fail to fulfill this objective, as they are really a textual requirement in natural language as a model element. Current efforts to directly leverage behavioral and structural models of the system lack an overarching theoretical framework with which to assess the adequacy of how those models are used to capture requirements. This paper presents an approach to construct true model-based requirements in SysML. The presented approach leverages some of SysML’s behavioral and structural models and diagrams, with specific construction rules derived from Wymore’s mathematical framework for MBSE and taxonomies of requirements and interfaces. The central proposition of the approach is that every requirement can be modeled as an input/output transformation. Examples are used to show how attributes traditionally thought of as non-functional requirements can be captured, with higher precision, as functional transformations.
E-collaboration systems have become a new way of doing business that supports and enables communication, coordination and cooperation between people in shared projects and so on. Yet, eliciting user requirements for e-collaboration systems has proved to be a great challenge, due to the need to capture different knowledge for many different types of stakeholder. This paper proposes an approach for eliciting user requirements for e-collaboration systems. This approach takes a scenario description of e-collaboration systems as input and transforms it into a rich set of four-perspective requirement models, namely Coordination Model, Communication Model, Connection Model, and Collaboration Model. These models, respectively, represent the coordination, communication, connection, and collaboration characteristics of e-collaboration systems. Collectively, these models aim to provide a more complete and accurate requirements specification. An example from a collaborative office system is used to illustrate the applicability of the proposed approach. This paper also discusses practical implications of the proposed approach and then provides an assessment for the proposed approach.
Several studies report that the use of model-centric methods in the automotive domain is widespread and offers several benefits. However, existing work indicates that few modelling frameworks explicitly include requirements engineering (RE), and that natural language descriptions are still the status quo in RE. Therefore, we aim to increase the understanding of current and potential future use of models in RE, with respect to the automotive domain. In this paper, we report our findings from a multiple-case study with two automotive companies, collecting interview data from 14 practitioners. Our results show that models are used for a variety of different purposes during RE in the automotive domain, e.g. to improve communication and to handle complexity. However, these models are often used in an unsystematic fashion and restricted to few experts. A more widespread use of models is prevented by various challenges, most of which align with existing work on model use in a general sense. Furthermore, our results indicate that there are many potential benefits associated with future use of models during RE. Interestingly, existing research does not align well with several of the proposed use cases, e.g. restricting the use of models to informal notations for communication purposes. Based on our findings, we recommend a stronger focus on informal modelling and on using models for multi-disciplinary environments. Additionally, we see the need for future work in the area of model use, i.e. information extraction from models by non-expert modellers.
This paper presents a novel security modelling language and a set of original analysis techniques, for capturing and analysing security requirements for cloud computing environments. The novelty of the language lies in the integration of concepts from cloud computing, with concepts from security and goal-oriented requirements engineering to elicit, model and analyse security requirements for cloud infrastructures. We then propose three analysis techniques, which support an automated process where given a model of a cloud computing system, developed with the proposed language, will enhance the model with new security knowledge, for example threats and vulnerabilities, mitigation strategies and assets and actor responsibilities. This is, to the best of our knowledge, the first attempt in the literature to develop a language for cloud computing security modelling and analysis, based on such integration, and support it with a set of automated techniques that enhanced the stakeholder-created models with security knowledge. The proposed modelling language and techniques are illustrated through walking examples and a case study based on our work in the VisiOn European project.
Requirements elicitation, analysis and modeling are critical activities for software success. However, software systems are increasingly complex, harder to develop due to an ever-growing number of requirements from numerous and heterogeneous stakeholders, concerning dozens of requirements types, from functional to qualitative, including adaptation, security and privacy, ethical, acceptance and more. In such settings, requirements engineers need support concerning such increasingly complex activities, and Requirements Engineering (RE) modeling tools have been developed for this. However, such tools, although effective, are complex, time-consuming and requiring steep learning curves. The consequent lack of acceptance and abandonment in using such tools, by engineers, paves the way to the application of RE techniques in a more error-prone, low-quality way, increasing the possibility to have failures in software systems delivered. In this paper, we identify main areas of lack of acceptance, affecting RE engineers, for such tools, and propose an approach for making modeling tools more effective in engaging the engineer in performing RE in a tool-based way, receiving adequate feedback and staying motivated to use modeling tools. This is accomplished by performing acceptance requirements analysis (through the Agon Framework) and using gamification to increase the engagement of engineers during the usage of RE modeling tools. Towards this end, we performed a case study, within the VisiOn European Project, for enhancing a tool for modeling privacy and security requirements. Our case study provides preliminary evidence that our approach supports in making RE modeling tools more engaging from the engineer perspective.
WebGIS applications have become popular due to technological advances in location and sensor technology, with diverse examples with different objectives becoming available. However, there is a lack of requirements elicitation approaches for WebGIS applications, restricting the communication between stakeholders, compromising the systematization of development, and the overall quality of the resulting systems. In this paper, we present the WebGIS Interface Requirements Modeling Language (WebGIS IRML), developed to support communication between stakeholders and developers, addressing user interface requirements during the development process of a WebGIS application. WebGIS IRML is supported by a requirements model editor, which was developed using Model-Driven Development (MDD) techniques. We also describe an experiment which was performed to evaluate the language, involving 30 participants (mostly IT Engineers), to measure the ease of understanding of the language models resulting from the use of the language in the editor and capture the feedback of participants about it. Generally, the results were quite positive, encouraging the use of the language for WebGIS development.
The research in this paper adds to the discussion linked to the challenge of capturing and modeling tacit knowledge throughout software development projects. The issue emerged when modeling functional requirements during a project for a client. However, using the design science research methodology at a particular point in the project helped to create an artifact, a functional requirements modeling technique, that resolved the issue with tacit knowledge. Accordingly, this paper includes research based upon the stages of the design science research methodology to design and test the artifact in an observable situation, empirically grounding the research undertaken. An integral component of the design science research methodology, the knowledge base, assimilated structuration and semiotic theories so that other researchers can test the validity of the artifact created. First, structuration theory helped to identify how tacit knowledge is communicated and can be understood when modeling functional requirements for new software. Second, structuration theory prescribed the application of semiotics which facilitated the development of the artifact. Additionally, following the stages of the design science research methodology and associated tasks allows the research to be reproduced in other software development contexts. As a positive outcome, using the functional requirements modeling technique created, specifically for obtaining tacit knowledge on the software development project, indicates that using such knowledge increases the likelihood of deploying software successfully.
Praxeme is an enterprise methodology that combines the two approaches SOA and MDA to build an information system. It is based on the ideology of separating the business concern into a homogeneous set called "aspect" to better control the usual complexity of a system. The instantiation of the ReLEL requirements model in the Praxeme methodology is an interesting approach to improve the quality of the software development process because it not only allows to specify the user requirements but also to represent the very precise conceptual level of the future system to be designed. Therefore, this article deals with the automatic generation of SOAP web services that represent the software aspect of the Praxeme methodology from the intentional aspect specified by the ReLEL requirements model. To achieve this, we proceeded in two steps, namely the proposal of the rules for deriving the Praxeme Logical Factory Model (logical aspect) into a Web Service Description Language model or WSDL (software aspect) classified as Model to Model Transformation (M2M) in the MDA approach and then the proposal of the rules for translating the WSDL model into a WSDL document known as Model to Text Translation (M2T). The result obtained from the approach proposed in this paper is a WSDL file which is an XML language allowing the complete description of a Web service. We used ATL for the implementation of the M2M approach transformation rules and then the Acceleo template engine for the translation of the M2T.
The fourth industrial revolution resulted in the emergence of new ways for engineering production lines with the goal to optimize manufacturing processes by reducing expenses at the same time. This trend is mainly supported by the application of interconnected components, which are managed in a distributed way, as impelled by the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) or Cyber-physical Systems (CPS). While the complexity of these Systems of Systems (SoSs) is constantly rising, requirements engineering before actual implementing the system becomes increasingly difficult. Thus, comprehensive frameworks providing a foundation for model-based systems engineering, like the Reference Architecture Model Industrie 4.0 (RAMI 4.0) or the Software Platform Embedded Systems (SPES), have been introduced. Although providing a standardized methodology, missing formalizations impede the modeling of systems according to detailed architectural specifications. To address these issues, this paper introduces an approach for eliciting, specifying and managing requirements according to a particular process and aligned to architectural standards. In the end, the result is evaluated by a real-world case study. The outcome of this work will either verify the future system to develop by ensuring traceability or enable interoperability by dealing as a consistent reference point across viewpoints, systems or even domains.
Engineering projects requires to consider the increasingly significant needs and constraints regarding expected behaviors, services, quality and security. These requirements are introduced into system and software engineering projects as functional and non-functional properties. Satisfying such properties implies rigorous processes that steer the project, from the requirements identification and definition to the system deployment and maintenance. Model-Based System Engineering (MBSE) is an effective approach to address security requirements and risk assessment at the early stages of the development life cycle, which enables cost-efficient fixes. The aim of this work is to investigate how cybersecurity risk assessment could be integrated into model-based requirement engineering. We propose a Model-based Cyberisk Assessment (MBCA) method, that comprises: (1) A semantic alignment between risk assessment concepts and system modeling concepts and (2) A modeling language extension to represent security concepts and metrics throughout the system modeling life cycle. To illustrate our approach, validate its applicability and evaluate its expressiveness, we applied it to an industrial in-flight entertainment system.
In this paper, we report on our 5-year’s practical experience of designing, developing and then deploying a Model-based Requirements Engineering (MBRE) approach and language in the context of three different large European collaborative projects providing complex software solutions. Based on data collected both during projects execution and via a survey realized afterwards, we intend to show that such an approach can bring interesting benefits in terms of scalability (e.g., large number of handled requirements), heterogeneity (e.g., partners with different types of RE background), traceability (e.g. from the requirements to the software components), automation (e.g., requirement documentation generation), usefulness or usability. To illustrate our contribution, we exemplify the application of our MBRE approach and language with concrete elements coming from one of these European research projects. We also discuss further the general benefits and current limitations of using this MBRE approach and corresponding language.
Automatic generation of requirements documents is an essential feature of the model-driven CASE tools such as UML and SysML designers. However, the quality of the generated documents from the current tools highly depends on the attached descriptions of models but not the quality of the model itself. Besides, if the stockholders ask to generate ISO/IEC/IEEE 29148-2018 conformed documents, extra templates are required. In this paper, we propose a CASE tool named RM2Doc, which can automatically generate ISO/IEC/IEEE 29148-2018 conformed requirements documents from UML models without any templates. In addition, the flow description can be generated from a use case without additional information. Moreover, it can automatically generate the semantic description of system operations only based on the formal expression of OCL. We have conducted four case studies with over 50 use cases. Overall, the result is satisfactory. The 95% requirements documents can be generated from the requirements model without any human interactions in 1 second. The proposed tools can be further developed for the industry of software engineering.The tool can be downloaded at http://rm2pt.com/rm2doc, and a demo video casting its features is at https://youtu.be/4z0Z5mrLfBc
The crucial factor for a successful usage of modeling approaches of systems engineering is the interaction of language, method, and tool. For this, specific challenges arise for the application of MBSE in agile requirements engineering. From observations in agile development practice at a machine tool manufacturer, the challenges for model-based requirements engineering are described and each is assigned to its critical aspect of modeling: The language must formally represent the requirements data model, especially for planning engineering generations. The tool must support collaborative, interdisciplinary cooperation, and consider the dynamics of the requirements model during the development process. The method must individually support the requirements engineering activities, which are carried out several times in a sprint during the development process and must enable a target-oriented process for bundling the requirements into engineering generations. Taking these demands into account, an approach is then presented providing activity-based views in conjunction with activity steps based on a consistent ontology for the description of product requirements and verification activities. The activity steps are composed in activity patterns and support the user in making use of the views for modeling requirements for the engineering generations. The approach is implemented in the software JIRA at a machine tool manufacturer. The subsequent evaluation shows that the approach is used in development practice and offers the potential to plan engineering generation systematically and comprehensibly and to ensure a regular review of the implemented requirements.
The increasing complexity of cyber-physical systems (CPSs) makes their design, development and operation extremely challenging. Due to the nature of CPS that involves many heterogeneous components, which are often designed and developed by organizations belonging to different engineering domains, it is difficult to manage, trace and verify their properties, requirements and constraints throughout their lifecycle by using classical techniques. In this context, the paper presents an integrated solution to formally define system requirements and automate their verification through simulation. The solution is based on the FOrmal Requirements Modeling Language and the Modelica language. The solution is exemplified through two case studies concerning a Trailing-Edge High-Lift system and a Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning system.
Nowadays, large-scale software systems in many domains, such as smart cities, involve multiple parties whose privacy policies may conflict with each other, and thus, data privacy violations may arise even without users being aware of it. In this context, identifying data security requirements and detecting potential privacy violations are crucial. In the area of model-based security requirements analysis, numerous research efforts have been done. However, few existing studies support automatic privacy violation identification from software requirements. To fill this gap, this paper presents MBIPV, a Model-Based approach for Identifying Privacy Violations from software requirements. First, this paper identifies six types of privacy violations in software requirements. Second, the MBIPV profile is proposed to support modeling software requirements using UML. Third, the MBIPV prototype tool is developed to generate formal models and corresponding privacy properties automatically. Then, the privacy properties are automatically verified by model checking. We evaluated the MBIPV method through case studies of four representative software systems from different domains: smart health, smart transportation, smart home, and e-commerce. The results show that MBIPV has high accuracy and efficiency in identifying the privacy violations from the software requirements. To the best of our knowledge, MBIPV is the first model-based approach that supports the automatic verification of privacy properties of UML software requirement models. The source code of the MBIPV tool and the experimental data are available online at https://github.com/YETONG1219/MBIPV.
Using models for requirements engineering (RE) is uncommon in systems engineering, despite the widespread use of model-based engineering in general. One reason for this lack of use is that formal models do not match well the trend to move towards agile developing methods. While there exists work that investigates challenges in the adoption of requirements modelling and agile methods in systems engineering, there is a lack of work studying successful approaches of using requirements modelling in agile systems engineering. To address this gap, we conducted a case study investigating the application of requirements models at Ericsson AB, a Swedish telecommunications company. We studied a department using requirements models to bridge agile development and plan-driven development aspects. We find that models are used to understand how requirements relate to each other, and to keep track with the product’s evolution. To cope with the effort to maintain models over time, study participants suggest to rely on text-based notations that bring the models closer to developers and allow integration into existing software development workflows. This results in tool trade-offs, e.g., losing the possibility to control diagram layout.
Machine learning (ML)-enabled is one of the appealing characteristics of modern software systems, which usually contain ML components to make the system more intelligent for easier living. Requirements for ML-enabled software systems involve functional, quality, environmental, and data requirements. UML is a de facto approach for requirements analysis and system design, but its current modeling capabilities do not yet cover ML-enabled software systems to describe software quality requirements, environmental requirements, and data requirements. In this paper, we propose a requirements model for ML-enabled software systems and a modeling process for this model based on an extension of UML. In addition, we demonstrate the proposed model and modeling process through the case of the Tesla Autopilot system. The results show that the proposed model is expressive and usable and has a low learning curve when the software developers have basic knowledge of UML. Our proposed model can be further implemented and used in industrial settings.
The abundance of complex natural language descriptions related to requirements data presents major challenges for requirement analysis. Knowledge graphs (KGs), as the latest achievement in symbolic studies, are widely used in various fields due to their rich semantic expressive abilities. However, existing methods that mine resource description framework (RDF) triples in classical KGs cannot effectively capture the fuzzy semantic information in the product development system. To address this, we propose a multicriteria requirement ranking method based on uncertain knowledge representation and reasoning (KRR). First, we defined a model for representing uncertain knowledge to organize diverse data from multiple sources. This process was accomplished by constructing the requirement ontology, which is based on the function-behaviour-structure (FBS) model and requirements modelling-related documents. Next, a knowledge representation approach named the fuzzy requirement knowledge graph (FRKG) was devised by combining attribute confidence and predicate fuzziness. Then, knowledge reasoning rules were designed to enhance the edges in the FRKG, unveiling potential relationships between nodes. Utilizing the enriched FRKG (EFRKG), we proposed a multicriteria requirement ranking method based on grey relational analysis (GRA). To validate the effectiveness of the proposed approach, we conducted a case study involving unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs). Furthermore, the semantic extension capability of FRKG was evaluated, and a comparison with traditional multicriteria requirement ranking methods was performed to demonstrate the efficiency of the proposed approach from both perspectives.
Requirements engineering (RE) is essential for system design because incorrect or incomplete RE can lead to misunderstandings, gaps, and mistakes that can negatively affect projects. Higher-quality requirements can reduce errors. However, verification and validation (V&V) of requirements qualities is challenging. Formal modeling enables automation for early V&V of large requirements sets. The use of patterns improves requirements quality, but gaps still exist in formal modeling and V&V methodologies. This paper presents a system requirements conceptual model with requirements writing patterns that enable the systems requirements modeling and V&V, along with a comparative analysis with existing concepts in the literature.
Determining relationships between user requirements and software product functionalities enables an early-stage requirements evaluation and project risk assessment. This leads to preliminary uncertainty detection which can minimize gaps for the fulfillment of demanding needs. Therefore, a multi-step approach is introduced to elicit user requirements, define functional specification of software products, and classify project parts into four different uncertainty categories. The allocation is based on the determined relationship and considers requirements engineering as well as model-based approaches. Implementing the introduced approach provides distinct advantages, like the inclusion of unlimited number of project parts, the realization in any granular environment, and the unified communication between various numbers of stakeholders. Additionally, a continuous evaluation is given to the modular characteristics of the assessment criteria. Project management capabilities need to be considered during the simultaneous application of this methodology. This can have crucial impact on the achievement of desired project outcomes, especially in the context of the transition to Industry 4.0.
Autonomous Driving Systems (ADSs) have been developed quickly in recent years, robust and complete system requirements are essential for high-quality ADSs. Requirements modeling is a process of describing and analyzing system requirements using various techniques, which is a critical step for ensuring high-reliability requirements. Restricted Use Case Modeling (RUCM) is a use case modeling method to reduce the ambiguity of requirements written in natural language, which has been extended to diverse applications. By extending RUCM with autonomous driving concepts, RUCM for Autonomous Driving Systems (RUCM4ADS) can specify autonomous driving scenarios in the form of use case specifications and diagrams. However, due to the diversity and complexity of autonomous driving scenarios, the constructed requirement models require multiple manifestations to be compared and analyzed. To this end, in this paper, we extend the metamodel of the Unified Modeling Language (UML) class and activity diagrams according to the Wise Drive framework for accurately expressing autonomous driving concepts and behaviors. Further, we realize modeling autonomous driving scenarios with extended UML meta-models, which enrich the manifestation of autonomous driving requirements. Meanwhile, we propose automatic model transformation approaches to promote the automatic analysis of autonomous driving scenario requirements, which generates UML extended models from RUCM4ADS models based on proposed extended metamodels. Finally, two real-world autonomous driving scenarios are used to verify the feasibility and effectiveness of the proposed model transformation approach. Results show that our proposed approach is effective, and can generate high semantic and syntactic accuracy class diagrams and activity diagrams with autonomous driving concepts and behaviors.
In recent years, an increasing number of studies have focused on user requirement modeling based on online review texts. However, traditional methods often overlook the integration of user requirement models with product design frameworks, failing to effectively transform dynamically changing user requirements into a basis for product attribute upgrades. This paper proposes a user requirement modeling and evolutionary analysis method based on review data, supporting the design upgrade of product attributes. This approach differs from traditional user requirement modeling and analysis methods in two main aspects: (1) integrating the designer’s product design framework into the classification and modeling of user requirements; (2) analyzing the dynamic changes in user requirements during product upgrades and formulating new product attribute upgrade strategies. Initially, the study extracts three categories of product attributes that designers are concerned about from the review data: function (F), structure (S), and parameters (P), and establishes a correlation model between these product attributes. Subsequently, using natural language processing technology to calculate sentiment scores for product attributes and employing the Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) model to analyze the impact of product attribute sentiment on user satisfaction, the study constructs the FSP-Kano model, achieving classification and modeling of user requirements for these three categories of product attributes. Finally, based on the dynamic changes in user requirements within the FSP-Kano model, strategies for upgrading next-generation products are formulated. Additionally, the study illustrates the proposed method with the example of BYD’s “Qin” series of new energy vehicles. Our research demonstrates that the proposed method can accurately and comprehensively extract user requirements and develop successful product attribute improvement strategies for the next generation of products.
Stakeholder Value Networks (SVN) is a method for identifying and prioritizing stakeholders and their associated requirements in complex engineering systems. Academics and companies have made great strides in the theoretical research and case studies of constructing the Stakeholder Value Networks Model (SVNM). However, most of the developed cases lack a modularized, scalable and traceable construction method to codify SVNM for stakeholders and requirements prioritization, which leads to problems such as low reuse rate of the model elements, poor configuration flexibility and lack of ability to connect with the analysis platform and system model. To address these issues, we propose a construction method of the SVNM based on Model-Based Systems Engineering (MBSE) from the perspective of model reusability, consistency and continuity. In this method, a SVNM is gradually constructed by using the MBSE modeling method “ARCADIA”, the MBSE modeling software “Capella” and some open-source add-ons. The model includes two steps of the mapping and quantifying in SVN method and can be connected to an analysis platform named Dependency Structure Matrix (DSM) modelling platform to implement the remaining steps of searching and analyzing. Furthermore, the results of the search and analysis can be used to prioritize stakeholders and requirements and recorded in the MBSE environment by modeling Stakeholder Requirements (SHRs). Then, we demonstrate the applicability of this method based on a case study of Robotic Vertical Farming Systems (RVFS). Finally, the RVFS-SVNM are modeled and analyzed in ARCADIA/Capella and DSM modeling platform, and the RVFS-SHRs are recorded in ARCADIA/Capella. The method can enable the prioritization of stakeholders and requirements to trace the entire system model and drive requirements engineering toward Model-Based Requirements Engineering (MBRE).
[Context and motivation] Digitalisation in agriculture is a socio-technical process that involves multiple stakeholders with diverse backgrounds and skills, e.g., in farming or technology. Capturing process transformation requires focusing on different dimensions, i.e., system structure, process flow, and actors' goals. Model-driven requirements engineering (MoDRE) techniques can offer the means to elicit and represent this multi-dimensional information. [Question/problem] This research investigates how MoDRE techniques can support the information exchange within interdisciplinary teams involved in the representation of process transformation in digital agriculture. [Principal ideas/results] We propose a method for process modelling in agricultural domains consisting of (1) a set of different diagrams, namely UML, i* and BPMN, (2) a procedure based on guidelines and (3) a tool to support the co-creation of the diagrams within the context of living labs (LLs, i.e., networks of stakeholders involved in a common socio-technical system). We plan to apply the method through action research in the context of 20 European living labs in the agricultural domain and evaluate the method through standard user questionnaires. [Contribution] There is little empirical evidence on using MoDRE techniques in real-world environments. This study fills this gap by developing a method for socio-technical process modelling in co-design contexts.
In this paper, we report on our 7 years of practical experience designing, developing, deploying, using, and evolving an iterative Model-based Requirements Engineering (MBRE) approach and language in the context of five large European collaborative projects providing complex software-intensive solutions. Based on significant data sets collected both during project execution and via surveys realized afterward, we demonstrate that such a model-based approach can bring interesting benefits in terms of scalability (e.g., a large number of handled requirements), heterogeneity (e.g., partners with different types of RE background), adaptability and extensibility (e.g., to various project's needs), traceability (e.g., from the requirements to the software components), automation (e.g., documentation generation), consistency and quality (e.g., central model), and usefulness or usability (e.g., actual deployment and practical use). Along the way, we illustrate the application of our MBRE approach and language with concrete elements from these several European collaborative projects. More broadly, we discuss the general benefits and current limitations of using such a model-based approach and corresponding language, as well as the related lessons we learned during these past years.
Object Constraint Language (OCL) is one lightweight formal specification. Integrated within the Unified Modeling Language (UML) standard, it serves as a cornerstone in requirements modeling, enjoying widespread adoption across various domains. OCL can precisely define the pre- and post-condition of system operations and system invariants. While OCL provides a simple yet expressive syntax, it lacks clarity in mapping Object-Oriented (OO) concepts, such as object states, object links, and object attributes. This ambiguity makes it challenging for OO developers to identify errors in requirements. In this paper, we propose an approach named OCLVerifier, which can automatically detect the requirements errors of OCL, such as conflict, redundancy, and failure error. OCLVerifier first transforms OO contracts and detection patterns into SMT formulas and then proves them by using a SMT solver. Finally, the results are mapped to the original OCL contracts to display detailed error type and location information. To evaluate OCLVerifier, we conducted a comprehensive evaluation of four case studies. Experimental results indicate that OCLVerifier successfully identifies 65.5% of error cases, with each identified case offering accurate error location information. Compared with human experts, OCLVerifier can reduce evaluation time by 80.8% while enhancing repair accuracy by 18%. The results are satisfactory, and the proposed approach can be further extended to the software industry for requirements verification.